The Joe Rogan experience. How did you stumble upon the story of fentanyl?
Because weren't you at one point in time, didn't you write about like rap music?
Yeah.
I have a book about NWA and Tupac, and I interviewed like ice cube.
Dr. Dre, Snoop dog, all those people. Yeah.
But I was the LA weekly music editor.
And I started looking into this story about why people were always dying at RAs.
So like,
I don't know if you remember a few years back every time there was a RA,
there were like one person died. Yeah. Two people died. Yeah. Or more.
And they always said it was from ecstasy,
but I knew that ecstasy was really not that dangerous of a drug, you know, M DM,
a pure or M D M a very few people died from that. So I was like,
what is going on here? And I looked into it and turned out.
It was all adultated it wasn't realxity it wasn't real Molly.
It was adultated with all these new drugs.
And I kind of went down the rabbit hole and I found out that all these new drugs
were made in China.
They were all synthetic and there were like hundreds of them.
And then it turns out that the most, you know, the worst of them was fentanyl.
And that's how I got onto the topic.
And fentanyl, most people think of fentanyl.
They think of it as being a new thing, but it's not really a new thing. Right.
It was wasn't it, it was invented in the fifties or something. Yeah.
Yeah. It was invented by a Belgian chemist. Um,
he was trying to find something that worked better than morphine in hospitals,
but doesn't morphine.
Work really good.
Well, it does, but for things like, um, yeah,
traditionally people have got a lot of mileage outta morphine, but, um,
for things like open heart surgery,
he wanted something that came on really fast and it lasted a long time.
And so he manipulated the chemical structure of morphine came up with fentanyl.
It was a blockbuster drug, you know, and still is using hospitals all the time.
Um, it's used, you know, there's the fentanyl patch people with cancer pain.
And then when you get a, like a colonoscopy, they give you fentanyl before that.
And then, uh,
women who have epidurals during childbirth that I believe is usually fentanyl.
So it's still an important hospital drug.
And so how did it come to be that this drug from the 1950s sort of
ream merges and it reemerged during the rape scene? Is that what it was? It was.
Actually before that it first started killing people a little bit at the
beginning of the eighties. And, uh, nobody knew what it was and.
It was from China then as well. No.
The back then, um, it was these kind of mystery chemists.
These guys who there was this one guy in particular called George Marquat
and he was like a,
a genius maniac who read all the chemical literature.
He learned about Fen. Fentanyle like, I should try to make this.
I bet it would be a hit with, um, recreational users.
And so he started making it, um,
and it stumped authorities because these people would die.
They would have track marks in their arms. Like it was heroin.
They would have syringes,
but they tested them afterwards and there's no heroin in their system.
And so they're like, what is this?
And the only way they finally found out that there was this, uh,
scientist testing, racing horses,
and apparently fentanyl was being used to dough horses,
what to like, um,
so they would withstand more pain and would go longer and faster and could
really train harder. Yeah. And so, so this guy made the connection. He's like,
oh, this is fentanyl. This is this new thing.
And he actually predicted what was gonna happen.
He's like we are in trouble now because not only is there fentanyl,
you can make a new, if you ban fentanyl, you can adjust the molecule,
make another type of fentanyl when they ban that can make another one add
infiniteitem basically. Wow.
So the, the thing with horses would be that they would be in pain,
so they wouldn't run as hard.
So they would force them to run harder by dulling the pain, I.
Guess. So, yeah. I don't know all the details of it, but you know,
it's performance enhancing basically.
And it seem kind of counterintuitive.
You would think that like an opiate would like make them sleepy. Right. Well.
I don't know all the detail. Maybe.
It just has a different effect on horses. Not sure.
So then the internet comes along and through the internet,
people started scouring the medical literature and scientific
literature and chemical literature, and then they find fentanyl. Exactly.
Yeah. Because back in the old days, um, you, you know,
scientists would publish a paper.
They're trying to find a new drug that they can patent say the drug isn't a
hit, no one wants to buy it.
It goes on some dusty university shelf never is heard from again,
but in the internet age, all of these papers start going online.
And so these rogue chem that I referenced in the title of my book,
they start finding particular scientists who work on the type
of drugs they're interested in.
And then they start going through all of their papers and they pick out drugs
that, uh, they think would work recreationally.
And so when fentanyl first came out, it was totally legal people.
You could walk around with a giant bag of it. They couldn't do anything.
And so it said in motion,
this sort of cat and mouse game between law enforcement and drug chemists,
which really still persists to this day, although mostly in China now, have you.
Ever experienced any opiates personally? I've.
Taken, yeah.
Like Tramadol in like Tylenol three and stuff like that. Tylenol.
Three is opiates in it.
I think it's coding. Mm-hmm <affirmative>, which is a low level opioid.
And I don't know to me, it, it always gets me stoned,
but it never seems to like, deal with the problem. I don't really like opioids,
you know what I mean? It like, I can't sleep and it's just not my.
Thing. It's not your thing. Yeah.
I had the old nyel had codeine didn't it did it. Didn't it did.
We we've been over this haven't we didn't. We try to figure this out. I,
I remember I took nyel in the nineties. In the late nineties, I was sick.
It was like the last time I ever took it. And, uh, it was wonderful.
I was lying bed going. This is amazing. I don't even give a. If I'm tired.
I'm sick. A lot of people say that.
I justs taken into the bed. I was like, ah,
and another time I had a morphine drip,
I had knee surgery and they gave me a little morphine, drip and anything,
every time I wanted, I could just hit this button Uh-huh and get a little more,
I was just hammering that button just line in bed.
Well, that's like the irony of, of the opioids.
It can produce the greatest pleasure. Yeah. And the greatest pain,
you know, I think Sam Quinonas said that like, um,
how can one molecule be,
give you the greatest pleasure imaginable and the worst pain imaginable?
Yeah. Lenny, Bruce had some crazy quote about it, something about that.
It was like getting hugged by God. I forget what the quote was, but, um,
I, I I've never had experience with heroin. Um,
but I knew I've known people that were addicts quite a few and
a couple of 'em that died.
And one of 'em that I knew there was this guy who was a pool hustler back of my
pool playing days in New York. And, uh, his nickname was Waterdog.
I forget his real name. I think it was bill, but no, that was Buffalo.
Bill's his other nickname. I don't remember his real name, but anyway,
this guy was, uh, an elite pool player, big time gambler. But the thing was,
he had to do heroin first. So like,
they would play games for like $10,000, these huge games.
And all these guys would come from the tri-state area.
They would come around to watch these matches and bed on the side. And, uh,
water dog would go to the bathroom and everybody knew what was going on.
He would go and shoot up and then he would come and he would sit on a chair like
this, just sit there for like half an hour to sit there.
Wow. And then, and then when it was over, when the half hour was over,
he was just like, okay. And then he would go and play.
He was in his own and he couldn't miss. And he was playing this guy,
um, this, this dude that I knew named George, who was also a big time gambler.
And he was just screaming and yelling that this, when he is on this stuff,
he can't miss Uh-huh. He can't, he had no nerves, like nothing bothered him.
You could scream in his face. He would look at you like an alien.
Like it didn't didn't bother him at all. Like, like an insect would look at you.
And he had this incredible ability to play,
like at the very best while he was up on heroin.
And I remember thinking what a bizarre drug, I mean,
think about all the amazing artists that's claimed. Yeah. I.
Think about jazz and all the.
Improv. Yes. Yeah. Lenny Bruce. So many people. I mean,
you go down the line, all these different folks. I mean that, uh,
mugha that I have out there of Hendrix. Yeah.
Those heroin got called heroin in Toronto.
I mean, yeah. I mean, people like, people prefer heroin to fentanyl.
Like I've heard it described as more soulful people say. Mm.
But the thing is you can't even get heroin in most parts of Amer like pure
heroin name anymore. It's all cut with fentanyl.
Well, you gotta go straight to Afghanistan, right?
Um, that's probably, uh, probably Mexico.
Yeah. Yeah. Jesus Christ. Now it,
can you grow poppies? Like, can that be grown in the, uh, yeah.
I've.
Heard that. Like, if you just walk around on the street,
like nice native neighborhoods, you'll see P poppies all the time.
You just don't even know you're looking at 'em and that's.
Actually heroin. Like you could get heroin from those poppies.
Yeah. It's like, if they grow NA you know, organically,
and you're not doing it on purpose, it's no big deal.
But if you start cultivating it, that's when it becomes you just got a place.
Stupid.
I don't know. They're beautiful. Look how pretty. Yeah. Do you,
so have San Pedro cactus on your lawn, sir? Oh, those are pretty too, right?
<Laugh> yeah. You, um, yeah. I mean those CACTES,
I can't imagine there are a lot of trained police who know what to look for.
I feel like if you're gonna grow some Mecal, you know,
asculine cacti or whatever, you're, that's the move you're.
Probably gonna be all right. Just mix it up with right. Cactus.
Pretend you're a cactus enthusiast. Yeah.
<laugh> just have it all over your lawn. Some succulent. Yeah.
I'm just really in a cactus man. They're pretty. Yeah.
And that of water 'em I go out of town a lot. Yeah, exactly. <laugh>
so when you know, what, what scares me is, you know, I mean,
I just know people that party,
I know people that take pills and it seems like
fentanyl is things are getting cut with fentanyl a lot. Mm-hmm <affirmative>,
it's not, it's not a,
an uncommon thing for all sorts of different drugs.
Like how many different drugs are cut with fentanyl street drugs? Oh.
Man. It is like an awful time to be a young person on the party scene. Um,
you know, like when I was coming up and probably when you were coming up,
they'd said the dare program and all that say no, just say, no,
they made it sound like every drug could kill you. Right. Right. Right. Now,
unfortunately that's like almost reality that basically
any pill or any powder,
if you didn't get your pill from CVS, you know,
your pain pill or from a pharmacy that's legit, it could be cut with fentanyl.
And that's how, uh, prince died.
That's how Tom petty and the rapper Mac Miller all died is that they were
thought they were taking legitimate pain pills. Is that really what.
Happened? That is really what happened. Yeah. So prince,
so prince got his from the, the black market. Yeah. Well.
The guy who supplied prince has been,
he refuses to really say exactly where he got it, but he's still alive. The,
the guy who got him for prince. Yeah. Where is he? I don't know.
I think in Minneapolis or something.
They should find that.
Guy. Well, the doctor is also, um,
like settled or something. I think the doctor might have been involved somehow.
It's a mystery where he got these pills, but you know,
prince was like doing the splits on stage at age, you know, 58 or whatever.
And he was definitely a guy who walked around with a lot of pain.
He was Jehovah's witness. He was not a recreational drug user,
as we think about it, you know, he was,
he wanted pain and I'm sure for years his handler or whatever,
was buying him off the dark net mm-hmm <affirmative> or whatever. And,
and they were fine for years, but,
but then a drug dealer trying to save some money, increase profits,
cut it with fentanyl and <affirmative> whew. That's, that's how he died.
And I heard Tom petty actually, um,
S suffered an injury or hurt himself at one of his concerts.
And he just literally walked outside and asked like the first
sketchy guy he saw if he had any pain pills. And that's what killed him.
Jesus Christ.
Oh God.